Jared Lyon
BINF6310
27 September 2023


Investigation of Extrachromosomal Palindromic Repeats in T. thermophila by Blackburn & Gall
Chromosomal telomeres play an integral role in cell growth and replication; they are series of palindromic repeats which occupy the ends of chromosomes that form the essential physical end caps which prevent the degradation of chromosomal tips (National Human Genome Research Institute, 2023). Blackburn and Gall performed a series of experimental investigations on cultures of Tetrahymena thermophila, specifically targeting the hexanucleotide repeats of extrachromosomal rDNA. The overall experiment obtained a myriad of results, but was unable to draw any confident conclusions regarding the structure, and therefore function, of the telomeric repeats used by the T. thermophila genome. In summary, Blackburn and Gall chose T. thermophila due to its dimorphic nature and unusual method of replication and amplification of extrachromosomal rDNA, characteristics which suggested considerable scientific value in the context of biogenetics should their mechanism and function be accurately characterized; however, despite several factors that exhibit T. thermophila as a positive use case for this investigation, multiple limiting factors contributed to an inconsistency of experimental results that rendered findings to be less impactful than anticipated. I suggest S. cerevisiae, or baker’s yeast, as a possible candidate for the replication of this study due its standing as a more applicable model organism both in laboratory settings and in relation to human genomics.
Several dominant factors contributed to the selection of T. thermophila as the model organism of this study. To begin, the most notable reasoning offered by Blackburn and Gall lies in the unique physiology of the organism; they specifically state, “The sequence and molecular structures at the termini [telomeres] of the extrachromosomal, linear, palindromic rDNA are … of considerable interest” (Blackburn & Gall, 1978, p. 34), referring to a unique portion of genetic material within the cell’s macronucleus. Tetrahymena is a genus of free-living ciliates that are classified as unicellular eukaryotes (Elliott, 1973). Blackburn and Gall specifically sought to characterize the palindromic telomere sequence of extrachromosomal rDNA within the macronucleus, which also exists in a chromosomally integrated form wherein it is covalently bonded to neighboring sequences in the micronucleus. To elaborate, T. thermophila exhibits nuclear dimorphism, subsequently forming a polyploid, metabolically active macronucleus that divides during vegetative growth as well as a diploid micronucleus that divides mitotically and functions as a germinal nucleus during cell division (Blackburn & Gall, p. 33). The larger macronucleus is destroyed during conjugal division and replaced by a germinal copy of the micronucleus (Elliot). Because several hundred copies of the extrachromosomal rDNA exist within the macronucleus whereas a single chromosomally integrated rDNA copy exists within the micronucleus, Blackburn and Gall theorize that the amplification of the extrachromosomal rDNA occurs after conjugation when the macronucleus is formed. This indicates that the sequences are replicated in their integrated form within the micronucleus during cell proliferation yet amplified in their extrachromosomal form within the macronucleus during vegetative growth. Moreover, replication of extrachromosomal rDNA begins at the center of the linear formations and proceeds bidirectionally outwards (Truett & Gall, 1977). Consequently, Blackburn and Gall theorize that the palindromic repeats present at the termini of these extrachromosomal sequences play an integral role in the mechanisms of their amplification and replication, particularly due to the fact that they exist separately from chromosomally integrated rDNA in the macronucleus in contrast to their integrated form in the micronucleus during replication (Blackburn & Gall, p. 34). Therefore, understanding the structure of these rDNA telomeres should elucidate their mechanism of replication as well as their role in amplification within the macronucleus of a vegetatively growing cell. Further significance of these structures is supported by their evolutionary conservation in other species, such as T. pyriformis in addition to other species of the Tetrahymena genus, suggesting that these identical hexanucleotide sequences play similar roles in multiple species (Blackburn & Gall, p. 52).
        Several key advantages and limitations are present when utilizing T. thermophila as a model organism. First, proliferation of this model organism is relatively fast since its population doubles approximately every two hours, (Frankel & Nelsen, 2001). This allowed for Blackburn and Gall to quickly acquire stock cultures after roughly thirty-four hours of growth time across two different mediums (seventeen hours each), (Blackburn & Gall, p. 34). In comparison, E. coli doubles in population every twenty minutes under optimal growth conditions (Tuttle, 2021). Furthermore, T. thermophila exhibits a slightly higher tolerance to heat, maintaining positive growth up to 45°C (Frankel & Nelsen, 2001), whereas conventional E. coli strains begin to slow growth between 31-34°C (Kumar & Libchaber, 2013). This characteristic is especially relevant in the context of Blackburn and Gall’s study, since a higher tolerance to temperature may indicate a higher genomic G-C content, and thus presents T. thermophila as a good candidate for studies involving DNA replication since DNA samples are less likely to completely denature during replication and/or fingerprinting in laboratory conditions. Blackburn and Gall noted some limitations during experimentation. For instance, one hour of preincubation was required before pulse synthesis in restriction fragments was detected within the targeted palindromic sequences, therefore insinuating that the polymerase I activity during elongation was much slower than what had been observed in other experimental settings. Kornberg, 1969, previously suggested that the spacing between initiation sites on these telomeres were too small for the DNA polymerase to make efficient use of, therefore suggesting the polymerases acted in a highly unsynchronized manner and as a result possibly introduced a factor of error during strand orientation of the palindromic telomere sequence. This characterization by Blackburn and Gall in addition to other conflicting experimental results led to their stating that T. thermophila contained ‘unusual template properties’ in relation to the polymerases used, ultimately contributing to an unsuccessful discernment of the nature of the extreme ends of the rDNA molecules (Blackburn & Gall, p. 51). Ultimately, Blackburn and Gall concluded that their experimentation unsuccessfully provided any clear indication of the telomeric structures studied.
A favorable candidate that may be used to address the same research questions investigated by Blackburn and Gall is Saccharomyces cerevisiae, commonly known as baker’s yeast, which is also a dimorphic unicellular eukaryote (Gontar, 2018). S. cerevisiae exhibits a faster growth rate than T. thermophila, doubling population approximately every thirty minutes in ideal laboratory growth conditions (Kasemets, 2007), thereby allowing for faster colony proliferation. To continue, baker’s yeast also utilizes telomeric structures for capping, replication, recombination, and transcription (Wellinger, 2012), thus presenting this organism as an ideal candidate for experimental investigation regarding biochemical functions somewhat similar to that of T. thermophila. Altogether, these similar characteristics indicate that baker’s yeast may be an appropriate substitute to Blackburn and Gall’s use of T. thermophila; moreover, given the extensive research that has been conducted on S. cerevisiae, a better understanding of the experimental results may be within reach due to a higher level of available scientific context and consensus surrounding related genomic functions. S. cerevisiae also retains a genome that is twenty-three percent homologous to the human genome (Liu, 2017), which further supports baker’s yeast as an ideal model organism since experimental discoveries pertinent to its genomic mechanisms can better be compared and contrasted to that of the human genome. In this regard, the interpretation and generalizability of a similar study conducted on S. cerevisiae will be wider and more applicable to human genomics.
In conclusion, prior knowledge of T. thermophila physiology led Blackburn and Gall to select this species as a model organism when investigating telomeric repeats in relation to amplification and replication. Unfortunately, limiting factors prevented a clear interpretation of experimental results, and the structure of the observed palindromic repeats was somewhat inconclusive; consequently, S. cerevisiae emerges as a possible candidate for Blackburn and Gall’s experimental procedure. Regardless, several characterizations were made, including supporting evidence that the studied hexanucleotide repeat may play a role in processes beyond what were investigated by Blackburn and Gall, leaving this topic open for future investigation.
________________
References
Blackburn, E. H., & Gall, J. G. (1978). A tandemly repeated sequence at the termini of the extrachromosomal ribosomal RNA genes in Tetrahymena. Journal of molecular biology, 120(1), 33–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-2836(78)90294-2
Elliott AM (1973). Biology of Tetrahymena. Dowen, Hutchinson and Ross Inc. ISBN 978-0-87933-013-2.
Frankel, J., & Nelsen, E. M. (2001). The effects of supraoptimal temperatures on population growth and cortical patterning in Tetrahymena pyriformis and Tetrahymena thermophila: a comparison. The Journal of eukaryotic microbiology, 48(2), 135–146. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1550-7408.2001.tb00296.x
Gontar, A., Bottema, M. J., Binder, B. J., & Tronnolone, H. (2018). Characterizing the shape patterns of dimorphic yeast pseudohyphae. Royal Society open science, 5(10), 180820. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.180820
Kasemets, K., Nisamedtinov, I., Laht, T. M., Abner, K., & Paalme, T. (2007). Growth characteristics of Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C in changing environmental conditions: auxo-accelerostat study. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, 92(1), 109–128. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10482-007-9141-y
Kornberg, A. (1969). Science, 163, 1410-1418.
Kumar, P., & Libchaber, A. (2013). Pressure and temperature dependence of growth and morphology of Escherichia coli: experiments and stochastic model. Biophysical journal, 105(3), 783–793. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2013.06.029
Liu, W., Li, L., Ye, H., Chen, H., Shen, W., Zhong, Y., Tian, T., & He, H. (2017). From Saccharomyces cerevisiae to human: The important gene co-expression modules. Biomedical reports, 7(2), 153–158. https://doi.org/10.3892/br.2017.941
National Human Genome Research Institute. (26 September 2023). Telomere. https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/Telomere
Truett, M. & Gall, J. G. (1977). Chromosoma, 64, 295-303.
Tuttle, A. R., Trahan, N. D., & Son, M. S. (2021). Growth and Maintenance of Escherichia coli Laboratory Strains. Current protocols, 1(1), e20. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpz1.20
Wellinger, R. J., & Zakian, V. A. (2012). Everything you ever wanted to know about Saccharomyces cerevisiae telomeres: beginning to end. Genetics, 191(4), 1073–1105. https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.111.137851